---
layout: post
author: Katie Tovar
title: Katie's DT3
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---
```
The xx. is of medicynes symple kelyng 
the stomake. and compound for the saam.
The xxi. is of medicynes symple hetyng
the lyver. and compound for the saam.
The xxii. is of medicynes symple kelynege 
the lyver. and compound for the saam. 
The xxiij. is of medicines symple hetyng 
the splene. and compound for the saam. 
The xxiiij. is of medicines symple kelyng 
the splene. and compound of the saam. 
The xxv. is of medicines symple hetynge
the reynes. and compound for the saam.
The xxvi. is of medycines symple keling
the reynes. and compound for the saam.  
The xxvii. is of medycines symple hetyng
the moder. & compound for þe same & to kele þe moder also.
The xxviij. is of medycines symple hetyng
the ioyntes. and compound for the saam.
The xxix. is of medicines symple kelynge
the ioyntes. and compound for the same
For sooth somme goode frendes whiche tro- 
wed me to have syght of konnynge praiden.
```

[72R Transcription](https://technologies-of-history.github.io/dyngley-edition/folios/#/ec/f158/f/f158/text) 
<!--more-->

My page that I transcribed from Old English was about the different medicines and their simple healings for the stomach, liver, and spleen. I would assume it was different concoction of medication and how to compound is working. Although I do not completely understand all of what was transcribed I believe that I got a good amount understood. I thought the hardest thing about transcribing is not wanting to correct the word in modern English. For example when he wrote medicynes I wanted so badly to change it to medicines. Also it was hard for me to know what was meaningful in writing or what was accidental or careless scribbles in the writing especially since I knew the background of the page was a personal diary. I originally got assigned a page that was French and that throw me for a major loop because I could not even tell you one word in French let alone a word in French that was also written in old English.  
That being said, once I got the English page things rolled along quite well. I think I was fortunate enough to not have a super complicated page unlike some of my classmates. It was pretty simple to see the letters and have some meaning behind the text I was transcribing.
Using XMl mark-up can transform the utility by helping the reader understand the reading without having to have much experience reading old english. It helps new learners dive deeper into the subjects and also it allows experienced learners the ability to just analyse it without having to spend energy on reading it 5 times over. 
Encoding text with XML makes it more accessible to the public and it does not “gatekeep” information for the future. Just like how Smith argues that communicating embodied knowledge requires translation into a “how to” instead of keeping the information a secret, this writing down of letters from Dyngely, tying them and having the ability to annotate it to make it easier helps to open up this knowledge. It allows for open dialogue about things from the past that would not have been discussed before it being written down. 
